Project Documentation (#81)
macports/macports-webapp: docs/3-MODELS.md

## 2. MODELS (Storing the collected data)

The data collected from various sources, as discussed in [2-SOURCES](/docs/2-SOURCES.md), is stored in a PostgreSQL
database. The tables are designed using Django models.

All of the project's models are defined inside the app: `ports`. The models are split into three different files: `port`,

> `buildhistory` and `stats`. Each file contains the models related to the category defined by file name.

Reviewer: These could also be "internal links" (`ports`, `port`, `buildhistory`, `stats`), so that user reading the markdown on the webpage could just click and go straight to the file in question.

Author: I was thinking of doing this, thanks.

> #### 1. `Port` Model

Reviewer: I would either use just "Port" (probably without backticks) or "The Port Model". (Doesn't English always require as article before nouns?)
I don't see the need to use backticks in the title this case.
A matter of personal preference though.

It stored the basic information related to a port, with the following fields:

> - `portdir`

Reviewer: Maybe a short example as it's not necessarily clear to everyone what this is. I would also add:

> Subports share the same `portdir`.

- `description`
- `homepage`
- `epoch`
- `platforms`

> - `categories` - A many-to-many relation with `Category` model

Reviewer: What I find confusing this in this description overall (but it might be related to our basic database design/description) is that all of the following fields:
* maintainer
* categories
* variants
are all many-to-many relationships, yet each one of them is presented differently.

Author: Maintainer, Dependencies and Variants have separate tables, with a foreign key relating to the `Port` model.

I guess I do not completely understand what you are trying to say here.

- `long_description`
- `version`
- `revision`

> - `closedmaintainer`

Reviewer: It's probably makes sense to add a sentence describing what this is since our nomenclature is completely non-standard.

Author: Okay, thanks.

> - `name`

Reviewer: I feel that `name` is the most important field. I would put it on top.

- `license`

> - `replaced_by` - Default values is `Null` for active ports. If the value is not null, the port is considered as obsolete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `replaced_by` - `NULL` by default. If the port is obsolete and replaced by another one, the name of the new port is stored here.
```

> - `active` - Value is `False` for deleted ports, otherwise `True`*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `active` - `True` by default. `False` when the port no longer exists (in `PortIndex`).
```

Reviewer: Could you provide an example (URL pointing to ports.macports.org) of both (one `replaced_by` and one `active=False`) ports? For the `replaced_by` pick some python or perl subport which is simply replaced by a newer subport.

***A Port is marked as deleted when the port is available in the app's database, but does not exist in PortIndex. If a 
port with the same name is added later in time, then previous object is replaced with new object and the newer ports gets

> marked as `active=True` automatically.*

Reviewer: This way of using kind-of-footnotes is a bit strange (fist you have one star, then two for the actual description; and the star could interfere with markup, ...).
I would have pointed you [here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/25579868/how-to-add-footnotes-to-github-flavoured-markdown), but if you look at the other document, maybe you could simply add notes at the end of each table (when there's a reason to do so), avoiding footnotes altogether.

#### 2. `Category` Model

Contains the categories in which the ports is divided. It is related with the `Port` model using a many-to-many relation.
The model has a single field `name` which also becomes the primary key for the table.

#### 3. `Maintainer` Model

Stores email and github-handle of the maintainers, and maps them with objects from the `Port` model.

- `name`
- `domain`
- `github`
- `ports`- many-to-many relation with the `Port` Model.

*The `name`, `domain`, `github` triplet is unique. But due to inconsistencies in the `Portfiles`, there might be cases
when we have two entries with same github-handle but different emails. In such cases, a warning is displayed on the

> maintainer's page.*

Reviewer: I'm not sure if I ever saw such a warning. But what would be more useful would be a page displaying all such inconsistencies, so that we can easily fix them, else it's pretty impossible to find one. Not super high priority, but something to note down.

Author: Here is an example: https://ports.macports.org/maintainer/github/yan12125/

#### 4. `Variant` Model

Stores the variant and maps it to the related objects from the `Port` Model. It has only two fields:
- `port` - foreign key to `Port` Model
- `variant`

#### 5. `Dependency` Model

Contains relation for ports and their dependencies:

- `port_name` - foreign key to `Port` model
- `dependencies` - many-to-many relation with `Port` model

> - `type`

Reviewer: Write a list of valid values for `type`.

#### 6. `LastPortIndexUpdate` Model

> Stores only one object. The object tells about the git commit till which the port information is up-to-date and the time

Reviewer: Maybe:
```suggestion
Stores only one object containing the shasum of the git commit from which we extracted the latest information about ports.
```

when the update was carried out.

- `git_commit_hash`
- `updated_at`

---

#### 7. `Builder` Model

Stores names of the active builders from Buildbot. The build history is fetched only for these builders. This is the only

> place where information about builders is stored.

Reviewer: Do we explain anywhere how this table is filled?

#### 8. `BuildHistory` Model

The JSON received from buildbot is stored in this Model. Details of one build is one object for this model.

- `builder_name` - foreign key to `Builder` Model
- `build_id`
- `status`
- `port_name`
- `time_start`
- `time_elapsed`
- `watcher_id`

> ---

Reviewer: This could be a new section (see the other old document).

#### 9. `UUID` Model

Stores UUID of the users who have made submissions. There are no duplicates in the table, no matter how many submissions

> one user makes there is only one object representing the user.

Reviewer: You should still print the table with columns.

#### 10. `Submission` Model

The body of the submission made by the user is stored in this model, except the installed ports which have their own
model.

- `user` - foreign key to `UUID` model
- `os_version`
- `xcode_version`
- `os_arch`
- `build_arch`
- `platform`
- `macports_version`
- `cxx_stdlib`
- `clt_version`
- `raw_json` - stores the entire JSON object received in the submission

> - `timestamp`

Reviewer: Add a note that this is the timestamp on the server when the submission was received. (Everything else comes from submission.)
